**AGM Team Meeting 17**

Mar.23/22

Start Time: 9:00am

End Time: 9:20am

Attendees: Reid, Adam, Mason

Absent: Riley

**Project**

Progress:

- Adam has finalized the work on the role-based authentication, and is pretty much done
- More research is being done on multer.js and we anticipate having started work on file uploading by Friday

Problems:

- Ife has asked us to change our meeting date to something other then Friday, we have given him our preferred dates but have heard nothing back
- We have been informed that April 8th is the last day we are required to work on AGM, and we worry that we will not have enough features to present

**Plan**

Task for this week:

- Adam will continue to work on starting with multer.js, and the rest of the team as offered to help him where we can
- Mason has offered to utilize socket.io to create our chat system between users and their assigned moderator

Goals for next time:

- Adam suggested that we should include unit tests for the features that we have so far, but we anticipate this won’t be done till we have more planned features up and running
- Socket.io and multer.js are our top priority for this week
