**AGM Team Meeting 16**

Mar.16/22

Start Time: 9:00am

End Time: 9:20pm

Attendees: Reid, Adam, Mason, Riley

Absent: 

**Project**

Progress:

- More work has been done for the role-based authentication, we plan to continue this work and have something for Friday 
- Some research has been done on multer.js which we will be using for the attaching files in the item section of AGM. We should be more familiar with it by the end of the week, then we can start on its implementation

Problems:

- Nothing from Ife since our meeting last week so we are choosing just to improve on what we have
- We are concerned on what we will have to show by the time our final presentation in April. We hope that the other teams will be in a similar situation and that we are not the only ones who will have to present an unfinished product

**Plan**

Task for this week:

- We will continue to work on improving our role-based authentication system, and researching more on multer.js

Goals for next time:

- We hope to start work on implementing multer.js unless Ife has a different plan for us.
