**AGM Team Meeting 15**

Mar.09/22

Start Time: 9:00am

End Time: 9:10pm

Attendees: Reid, Adam

Absent: Mason, Riley

**Project**

Progress:

- We’ve successfully completed all that we need to do for the peer evaluation and are moving on the getting the report done and fixing a few issues mentioned in the evaluation

Problems:

- Meeting was quick today as it was just the two of us who attended, but we mainly discussed what we are doing for the report

**Plan**

Task for this week:

- We been given a rubric of 5 main points that we need to include in the report
- Mason has already started taking the information from the heuristic evaluation and creating a graph of the responses
- Reid will be responsible for the brief description writeup, although the list of features will be similar as to last time
- Adam chose to take the second point on identifying the participants in the study
- Riley will doe the user groups and the associated task list
- We will all contribute to the 4th point on the list of issues discovered, consolidating all of our notes into it
- Besides from the report, Ife also asked us to have role-based authentication by our meeting, so we will also be working on that

Goals for next time:

- Ife has mentioned that we should have a file sharing system in place using an extension called multer
- We have decided to have a write up done first as no one knows what multer is yet, but by next week we should have it implemented into the system.


