**Client Meeting 13 – AGMeeting**

Mar.04/22

Start Time: 2:15pm pst

End Time: 2:30pm pst

- Ife asked how we were doing with our database and authenticator, the groups told him that we’ve made a basic authenticator for now, and we are happy with our database layout
- Ife wants us to change the users to be one object in the database with fields for isMod and isAdmin
- Ife wants us to develop an authentication system. We had planned to go this route already
- He also said that he would push his role-based repo after the meeting for us to use 
- The plan is to continue to iterate on the authenticator for now, then we will focus on working with socket.io

