**Client Meeting 7 – AGMeeting**

Nov.19/21

Start Time: 10:00am pst

End Time: 10:10am pst

- Let Ife know where we are at with the sprint 2 wireframe
- Our group had issues with the styling changing from page to page, asked the other groups, they are not having the same issue. Could be an issue with components
- Some questions about the role call for another group, there seems to be some issues on Ifes end
- Ife requested all the teams to just push what we have so far, regardless of quality or completeness
- Adam showed off the styling issue to the meeting, Ife said to not worry about it for know and just focus on implementation
- Told Ife about our upcoming presentation and that we’ll need more user tasks for it
- Ife wants us to have most of the UI stuff done by Dec.10
- For the next portion of UI related stuff, we will be working with Redux. Ife told us to read up on it ahead of time
