**Client Meeting 16 – AGMeeting**

Apr.1/22

Start Time: 2:15pm pst

End Time: 2:35 pm pst

- Ife asked how we were doing on the assigned features, including the role based authentication and the chat messaging system. We told him that we have gotten both of these features implemented
- We mentioned to ife that we are only expected to work until April 8th and that whatever we have by that time is what we will present
- Team 0 brought up implementing a voting system, as it might not take much time. Ife explained that we could have this implemented with more time, which he thought we had
- Ife asked team 1 about their redux implementation to handle the login sequence as he was having issues getting it running
- Ife seemed stuck on this issue for a while and asked if we could help him out
- Team 0 showed off what they had done for the previous features. Ife asked if new users can be assigned to a moderator, which was not the case. Ife would like us to implement this in some way, maybe by having an admin assign these new users
- Team 2 explained their changes that they had done regarding the previous features
- Ife said that the general settings feature that was planned is something we probably won’t get to
- Team 1 also showed what they had been working on, and they are in a similar situation as the other 2 teams

