**Client Meeting 10 – AGMeeting**

Feb.04/22

Start Time: 2:15pm pst

End Time: 2:52pm pst

- Our group presented our ER diagram and described its design, Ife wanted us to describe our design by how users will use it
- Ife said that the structure of our database will be changing and will not be looking exactly like ours does now
- Ife wanted all groups approach as he’s not sure himself how the database should be designed, Ife says his suggestions are not the only approach we should take
- Ife says the Admin role should be for us, as developers. It shouldn’t have a meeting ID or be able to register, just observe
- Ife also wanted to see what our code looked like; we showed the 3 models that we had so far Admin, Moderator, and Participant
- We also showed how our database connection would work in server.js
- After we presented, group 2 presented their database design. Theirs did not revolve around users as much, more around the systems connected to the users: Meetings, Comments, Agenda, and company
- They specified that the most important connection is between the meeting node and the user node
- Their database is also built on PSQL, they had not set up sequalize yet however
- Ife said that we should focus on the ability to just log on authentication for database first, then we should work on meeting tables, agenda and so on
- Ife wanted us to export the database that we have so far to him so he can go over it
- Ife said he will upload a connection for front and back end soon that we can use
- Group 1s diagram was fairly similar to our, so they didn’t show their ER diagram. Their code structure was also pretty much the same, they had the same models that we used plus an index
- Mason asked what our next step after we would be work on an authenticator, Ife said that we would follow this with working on socket integration, but he wasn’t sure what we would be doing after that
- Ife wants an updated ER diagram from us by the end of Wednesday, as well a control-flow diagram 

