**Client Meeting 6 – AGMeeting**

Nov.05/21

Start Time: 10:00am pst

End Time: 10:15am pst

- Gave Ife updates on our front-end work, all teams have mostly replicated the wireframe
- Issues with dark mode, theme provider was not correctly routing to all the pages correctly. Ife will investigate it
- Apparently dark mode will not be a part of the final product regardless
- One of the other teams asked about the logo provided to us. This logo is not the one we’ll be using, so we can ignore it for now
- Ife will be providing us the next wireframe that we will work from on the weekend
- Styling we have doesn’t fill the whole page, might be something Ife can fix for us
- Talked about the upcoming peer evaluation, Ife was willing to change the schedule for us, but we told him that we’ll continue with his plan of working on front end things first
- Ife plans to have front end stuff done by the end of November
